Operating system logs are created on devices such as Linux and Windows systems.
Security events that can be identified by these logs include:

Security access events: For example, an unauthorized user attempts to view privileged data, such as a company payroll file.

Security permissions events: For example, a user attempts to give themselves permissions to view and edit a privileged file.

Application logs are created by devices such as Apache and IIS (Internet Information Services) servers.
Security events that can be identified by these logs include:

Application access events: For example, a brute force attempt to log into an administrative account on a web application.

Fraud events: For example, a user on a financial application attempts to transfer a large sum of funds to a suspicious external account.

Networking device logs are created on devices such as routers, switches, and DHCP/DNS servers.
Security events that can be identified by these logs include:

Administrative events: For example, a network administrator accidentally opens a port allowing unauthorized traffic into a network.

Network security events: For example, a DHCP starvation attack occurs in which the DHCP server receives thousands of requests in a short period of time, consuming all available IP addresses.

Security device logs are created on devices such as IDS/IPS, firewalls, endpoint devices, and honeypots.
Security events that can be identified by these logs include:

Endpoint events: For example, a user accidentally downloads malware onto their laptop from a phishing email.

IDS signature events: For example, a packet with an illegal TCP flag combination is identified by an IDS.


UBA is a security monitoring tool that  uses machine learning, artificial intelligence, and data processing to detect abnormalities in user activity.

UBA gathers information about typical user behaviors and creates baselines.

For example, UBA can gather information on the servers and systems that a user accesses as well as when and how frequently they do so.

UBA can then create alerts for when a user's activity deviates from this typical behavior.

If a user usually only logs onto a server between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m., Monday through Friday, UBA would create an alert if the user logged in on at 2 a.m. on a Saturday.

UEBA is a security monitoring tool similar to UBA, except it extends its monitoring to other "entities."

Entities can include routers, servers, and IoT (Internet of Things) devices.

UEBA looks at normal user and entity behaviors, and creates alerts when users or entities show abnormal activity.

SOAR, comparable to a SIEM, automates security processes and responds to security incidents.

Examples of automating security processes include:

Creating logging.
Assigning priorities to security incidents.

Examples of responding to security incidents include:

Launching security investigations.
Threat mitigation.

Similar to a SIEM, SOAR gathers machine data from multiple entities and analyzes the data for security events.

SOAR uses playbooks, which detail the processes and response actions for specific event.

Playbooks are designed and configured by each organization.

For example, an organization can design a playbook to automate the response to a phishing incident.

The below image illustrates how SOAR uses a playbook to automate each step of the response.

This diagram also illustrates how using SOAR playbooks can decrease incident response time.

